Bundle Configuration Reference
==============================

.. meta::
   :description: Exhaustive schema reference for LHP's Databricks Asset Bundle integration — CLI flags, pipeline_config.yaml, job_config.yaml, multi-job rules, and generated resource layout.

This page catalogs every option LHP exposes for :term:`Databricks Asset Bundle <DAB>` (DAB)
integration. For the step-by-step walk-through, see :doc:`configure_bundles`.

Scope
-----

LHP generates DAB pipeline and job resource YAML under ``resources/lhp/``. It
does not replace the Databricks CLI or modify ``databricks.yml`` (except the
deprecated auto-detect path described below).

Bundle activation
-----------------

CLI flags
~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Flag
     - Command
     - Behavior
   * - ``--no-bundle``
     - ``lhp init``
     - Skip ``databricks.yml`` and ``resources/lhp/`` scaffolding. Bundle is enabled by default.
   * - ``--no-bundle``
     - ``lhp generate``
     - Disable bundle sync even when ``databricks.yml`` exists.
   * - ``--pipeline-config FILE``, ``-pc FILE``
     - ``lhp generate``
     - Path to pipeline config YAML (relative to project root).
   * - ``--force``, ``-f``
     - ``lhp generate``
     - Regenerate LHP-owned resource files. With ``--pipeline-config``, also rewrites existing LHP-owned bundle YAML.
   * - ``--job-config FILE``, ``-jc FILE``
     - ``lhp deps``
     - Path to job config YAML.
   * - ``--bundle-output``, ``-b``
     - ``lhp deps``
     - Write generated job YAML under ``resources/`` for bundle deployment.
   * - ``--format``, ``-f``
     - ``lhp deps``
     - One of ``dot``, ``json``, ``text``, ``job``, ``all``. Default ``all``.

There is no ``--bundle`` flag. Bundle is on whenever ``databricks.yml`` exists in
the project root and ``--no-bundle`` is not set.

Project layout
--------------

.. code-block:: text

   <project_root>/
   ├── databricks.yml          # User-owned; LHP does not modify it
   ├── lhp.yaml                # LHP project config
   ├── pipelines/              # Flowgroup YAML
   ├── substitutions/          # <env>.yaml per target
   ├── config/                 # Optional pipeline_config.yaml / job_config.yaml
   ├── resources/
   │   ├── lhp/                # LHP-owned; regenerated each run
   │   └── *.job.yml           # User-owned; LHP leaves them alone
   └── generated/              # Auto-generated Python; do not edit

Files under ``resources/lhp/`` carry a ``# Generated by LakehousePlumber``
header. Manual edits are overwritten on the next generate cycle.

Sync behavior
-------------

Conservative sync runs after every successful ``lhp generate``. The decision
matrix is enforced by ``BundleManager.sync_resources_with_generated_files``:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 30 40

   * - Generated dir
     - File in ``resources/lhp/``
     - Action
   * - Exists
     - LHP-owned
     - Preserve (no rewrite)
   * - Exists
     - LHP-owned + ``--force`` + ``--pipeline-config``
     - Regenerate
   * - Exists
     - User-edited (no LHP header)
     - Rename to ``.bkup`` and recreate
   * - Exists
     - None
     - Create
   * - Missing
     - Any
     - Delete
   * - Any
     - Multiple files defining the same pipeline
     - Raise ``BundleResourceError``

Backup names use ``.bkup``, ``.bkup.1``, ``.bkup.2`` on collision.

Target binding rules
--------------------

- Each target in ``databricks.yml`` must have a matching ``substitutions/<target>.yaml``.
- Pipeline names in ``pipelines/`` must use ``[a-zA-Z0-9_-]+`` only.
- Generated resource files: ``<pipeline_name>.pipeline.yml`` (preferred) or
  ``<pipeline_name>.yml``.
- Generated pipeline resource key: ``<pipeline_name>_pipeline``.

Pipeline configuration
----------------------

File format
~~~~~~~~~~~

Multi-document YAML. The first document holds ``project_defaults``; each
subsequent document targets one or more pipelines via the ``pipeline`` key.

.. code-block:: yaml
   :caption: config/pipeline_config.yaml

   project_defaults:
     catalog: "${catalog}"
     schema: "${schema}"
     serverless: true

   ---
   pipeline:
     - bronze_load
   serverless: false
   clusters:
     - label: default
       node_type_id: Standard_D16ds_v5
       autoscale:
         min_workers: 2
         max_workers: 10

Pass file path with ``--pipeline-config`` / ``-pc``.

Top-level keys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Explicitly rendered by ``pipeline_resource.yml.j2``. Source of truth:
``EXPLICITLY_RENDERED_PIPELINE_CONFIG_KEYS`` in
``src/lhp/bundle/manager.py``.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 12 18 50

   * - Key
     - Type
     - Default
     - Notes
   * - ``catalog``
     - string
     - none
     - Unity Catalog name. Required if ``schema`` is set. Supports ``${token}``.
   * - ``schema``
     - string
     - none
     - Schema name. Required if ``catalog`` is set. Supports ``${token}``.
   * - ``serverless``
     - bool
     - ``true``
     - Pipeline compute mode.
   * - ``edition``
     - string
     - ``ADVANCED``
     - One of ``CORE``, ``PRO``, ``ADVANCED``. Ignored when ``serverless: true``.
   * - ``channel``
     - string
     - ``CURRENT``
     - One of ``CURRENT``, ``PREVIEW``.
   * - ``continuous``
     - bool
     - ``false``
     - Streaming/continuous mode.
   * - ``photon``
     - bool
     - none
     - Photon engine. Non-serverless only.
   * - ``clusters``
     - list
     - none
     - Cluster specs. Used when ``serverless: false``. See `Cluster keys`_.
   * - ``configuration``
     - dict
     - none
     - Spark/DLT properties. Values must be quoted strings.
   * - ``notifications``
     - list
     - none
     - Email recipients + alert types. See `Notification keys`_.
   * - ``tags``
     - dict
     - none
     - Pipeline tags. Non-serverless only.
   * - ``event_log``
     - dict or ``false``
     - none
     - Per-pipeline event log override. ``false`` opts out of project-level event_log.
   * - ``environment``
     - dict
     - none
     - Pip dependencies passed through as-is.
   * - ``permissions``
     - list
     - none
     - Pipeline ACL entries. See `Permission keys`_.

Any other top-level key is rendered verbatim via the pass-through filter,
including ``run_as``, ``trigger``, ``budget_policy_id``, ``edit_mode``, and any
Databricks Pipelines API field added after your LHP release.

Cluster keys
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each entry under ``clusters``:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 60

   * - Key
     - Notes
   * - ``label``
     - Required. ``default`` for the main cluster.
   * - ``node_type_id``
     - Optional. Mutually exclusive with ``instance_pool_id``.
   * - ``instance_pool_id``
     - Optional.
   * - ``driver_node_type_id``
     - Optional.
   * - ``driver_instance_pool_id``
     - Optional.
   * - ``policy_id``
     - Optional cluster policy.
   * - ``autoscale.min_workers``
     - Required when ``autoscale`` set.
   * - ``autoscale.max_workers``
     - Required when ``autoscale`` set.
   * - ``autoscale.mode``
     - Optional. Typically ``ENHANCED``.

Notification keys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each entry under ``notifications``:

- ``email_recipients``: list of email strings.
- ``alerts``: list of alert types — ``on-update-success``, ``on-update-failure``,
  ``on-update-fatal-failure``, ``on-flow-failure``.

Permission keys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each entry under ``permissions``:

- ``level``: one of ``CAN_VIEW``, ``CAN_RUN``, ``CAN_MANAGE``.
- ``user_name``, ``group_name``, or ``service_principal_name``: exactly one.

Configuration block
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``configuration`` dict is merged with LHP's mandatory
``bundle.sourcePath`` entry. All values **must** be quoted strings; unquoted
booleans or integers raise a validation error. Any user-supplied
``bundle.sourcePath`` is silently ignored.

Monitoring alias
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The reserved key ``__eventlog_monitoring`` under ``pipeline:`` targets the
monitoring pipeline generated by ``monitoring`` in ``lhp.yaml``. See
:doc:`monitoring_reference` for resolution rules.

Merge precedence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``DEFAULT_PIPELINE_CONFIG`` → ``project_defaults`` → pipeline-specific. Deep
merge for dicts; lists are replaced wholesale.

Substitution applies to every field. Tokens resolve from
``substitutions/<env>.yaml`` at generate time.

Catalog/schema validation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Both ``catalog`` and ``schema`` must be set, or neither.
- Both must be non-empty after substitution.
- Partial definition raises ``LHPConfigError`` code 026.

.. deprecated:: 0.7.8
   Auto-detection of catalog/schema from generated Python files and the
   resulting writes to ``databricks.yml`` variables
   (``default_pipeline_catalog``, ``default_pipeline_schema``) are deprecated.
   The fallback template emits ``${var.default_pipeline_catalog}`` and
   ``${var.default_pipeline_schema}`` only when ``catalog`` and ``schema`` are
   missing from pipeline config. Removal is scheduled for v1.0.0; from then on
   ``--pipeline-config`` becomes required for bundle projects.

Job configuration
-----------------

File format
~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml
   :caption: config/job_config.yaml

   project_defaults:
     max_concurrent_runs: 1
     performance_target: STANDARD
     queue:
       enabled: true

   ---
   job_name:
     - bronze_ingestion_job
   timeout_seconds: 7200
   schedule:
     quartz_cron_expression: "0 0 2 * * ?"
     timezone_id: America/New_York

Pass with ``--job-config`` / ``-jc``. Use ``--bundle-output`` to write the job
file under ``resources/`` for bundle deployment.

Top-level keys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Explicitly rendered by ``job_resource.yml.j2``. Source of truth:
``EXPLICITLY_RENDERED_JOB_CONFIG_KEYS`` in
``src/lhp/core/services/job_generator.py``. Defaults from
``JobGenerator.DEFAULT_JOB_CONFIG``.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 18 57

   * - Key
     - Default
     - Notes
   * - ``max_concurrent_runs``
     - ``1``
     - Concurrent run cap.
   * - ``performance_target``
     - ``STANDARD``
     - One of ``STANDARD``, ``PERFORMANCE_OPTIMIZED``.
   * - ``queue.enabled``
     - ``true``
     - Job queueing.
   * - ``timeout_seconds``
     - none
     - Job-level timeout.
   * - ``tags``
     - none
     - Job tag dict.
   * - ``email_notifications``
     - none
     - ``on_start`` / ``on_success`` / ``on_failure`` lists of recipients.
   * - ``webhook_notifications``
     - none
     - ``on_start`` / ``on_success`` / ``on_failure`` lists of ``{id}`` entries.
   * - ``permissions``
     - none
     - Job ACL entries (same shape as pipeline ``permissions``).
   * - ``schedule.quartz_cron_expression``
     - none
     - Required when ``schedule`` set.
   * - ``schedule.timezone_id``
     - none
     - Required when ``schedule`` set.
   * - ``schedule.pause_status``
     - none
     - ``PAUSED`` or ``UNPAUSED``.
   * - ``notebook_cluster``
     - none
     - Monitoring job only. ``new_cluster`` dict or ``existing_cluster_id``.
   * - ``generate_master_job``
     - ``true``
     - LHP-internal; controls master-job emission. Never written to output.
   * - ``master_job_name``
     - none (auto)
     - LHP-internal; overrides the master-job name. Never written to output.

Any other top-level key passes through as-is. Common examples:
``trigger.file_arrival``, ``continuous``, ``run_as.service_principal_name``,
``git_source``, ``health``, ``parameters``, ``environments``, ``edit_mode``,
``budget_policy_id``. LHP does not validate pass-through fields against the
Databricks Jobs API; misspellings surface at deploy time.

Merge precedence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``DEFAULT_JOB_CONFIG`` → ``project_defaults`` → job-specific. Deep merge for
dicts; lists are replaced wholesale. Author key order preserved.

Multi-job orchestration
-----------------------

Set ``job_name`` on flowgroups in ``pipelines/*.yaml`` to split execution into
named jobs.

.. code-block:: yaml
   :caption: pipelines/bronze/customer.yaml (excerpt)

   pipeline: data_bronze
   flowgroup: customer_ingestion
   job_name:
     - bronze_ingestion_job

Rules
~~~~~

- All-or-nothing: if any flowgroup sets ``job_name``, every flowgroup must set
  it.
- Format: ``^[a-zA-Z0-9_-]+$``.
- ``--pipeline`` filter is rejected in multi-job mode.

Generated artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   resources/
   ├── <job_name>.job.yml          # One per unique job_name
   └── <project>_master.job.yml    # Master orchestrator

The master job wires individual jobs together via ``task_key`` references with
``depends_on`` edges resolved from dependency analysis.

Generated resource example
--------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml
   :caption: resources/lhp/bronze_load.pipeline.yml

   # Generated by LakehousePlumber - Bundle Resource for bronze_load
   resources:
     pipelines:
       bronze_load_pipeline:
         name: bronze_load_pipeline
         catalog: ${var.catalog}
         schema: ${var.bronze_schema}
         serverless: true
         libraries:
           - glob:
               include: ${workspace.file_path}/generated/${bundle.target}/bronze_load/**
         root_path: ${workspace.file_path}/generated/${bundle.target}/bronze_load
         configuration:
           bundle.sourcePath: ${workspace.file_path}/generated/${bundle.target}

LHP always emits ``libraries`` as a glob, ``root_path`` under
``${workspace.file_path}/generated/${bundle.target}``, and the
``bundle.sourcePath`` configuration entry.

Configuration templates
-----------------------

``lhp init`` writes starter templates under ``config/``:

- ``config/pipeline_config.yaml.tmpl``
- ``config/job_config.yaml.tmpl``

Copy each to drop the ``.tmpl`` suffix before editing.

Version enforcement
-------------------

The optional ``required_lhp_version`` key in ``lhp.yaml`` pins generation to a
specific LHP release range, so the same project produces the same Python output
across development and CI. ``lhp validate`` and ``lhp generate`` fail when the
installed LHP version falls outside the range. Informational commands such as
``lhp show`` skip the check so you can inspect a project even on a mismatched
LHP version.

LHP accepts any `PEP 440 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/>`_ version
specifier:

.. code-block:: yaml
   :caption: lhp.yaml — version specifier examples

   # Exact pin
   required_lhp_version: "==0.4.1"

   # Allow patch updates only (equivalent to >=0.4.1,<0.5.0)
   required_lhp_version: "~=0.4.1"

   # Range with exclusion
   required_lhp_version: ">=0.4.1,<0.5.0,!=0.4.3"

   # Allow minor updates
   required_lhp_version: ">=0.4.0,<1.0.0"

Projects without ``required_lhp_version`` run on any installed LHP version.

Emergency bypass
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Set ``LHP_IGNORE_VERSION=1`` to skip version checking temporarily:

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: Bypass version checking

   export LHP_IGNORE_VERSION=1
   lhp generate -e dev

   # Or inline for a single command
   LHP_IGNORE_VERSION=1 lhp validate -e prod

.. warning::
   ``LHP_IGNORE_VERSION=1`` defeats the purpose of version pinning. Reserve it
   for incident response, not regular workflows.

CI/CD integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Install the LHP version matching the project requirement before running
``lhp validate`` or ``lhp generate``:

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: CI pipeline with version enforcement

   # Install the exact range from lhp.yaml
   pip install "lakehouse-plumber$(yq -r .required_lhp_version lhp.yaml)"

   # Or pin a known-good range
   pip install "lakehouse-plumber>=0.4.1,<0.5.0"

   # Validate and generate (fail-fast on mismatch)
   lhp validate -e prod
   lhp generate -e prod

Error codes
-----------

- ``LHPConfigError 026`` — Incomplete or empty ``catalog``/``schema`` after
  substitution. See :doc:`errors_reference` for the full list.
- ``LHPConfigError 028`` — ``BundleManager`` initialized with no
  ``project_root``.
- ``BundleResourceError`` — Multiple files define the same pipeline, malformed
  YAML in ``resources/lhp/``, or filesystem failure.
- ``MissingDatabricksTargetError`` — ``databricks.yml`` is missing or its
  ``targets`` section omits a substitution environment. Emitted only by the
  deprecated auto-detect path.

See also
--------

- :doc:`configure_bundles` — Bundle setup walk-through.
- :doc:`cicd` — CI/CD patterns and deployment workflows.
- :doc:`architecture` — How LHP's state, generation, and sync layers fit together.
- :doc:`dependency_analysis` — Pipeline dependency graph and orchestration job generation.
- :doc:`monitoring_reference` — Event log and monitoring pipeline schema.
- :doc:`errors_reference` — Full error code catalog.
